add Clinic docs (#7704)
pingcap/docs: clinic/clinic-introduction.md

---
title:  Overview of TiDB Clinic Diagnostic Service

> summary: Introduces the Clinic diagnostic service, including tool components, user scenarios, and implementation principles.

Author: ```suggestion
summary: Introduce the Clinic diagnostic service, including tool components, user scenarios, and implementation principles.
```

> summary: Learn about the Clinic diagnostic service, including tool components, user scenarios, and implementation principles.

Author: ```suggestion
summary: Learn about the Clinic Diagnostic service, including tool components, user scenarios, and implementation principles.
```

---

## Clinic Diagnostic Service Overview

> Clinic is a diagnostic service provided by PingCAP for TiDB clusters. To the clusters deployed using TiUP and TiDB Operator, this service provides remote troubleshooting and local quick check for the cluster status. Using the service, you can ensure the stable operation of your TiDB cluster for its full life-cycle, predict potential issues, reduce the probability of the issues, quickly troubleshoot, and fix issues.

Author: ```suggestion
Clinic is a diagnostic service provided by PingCAP for TiDB clusters. To the clusters deployed using TiUP and TiDB Operator, this service helps to troubleshoot remotely and perform a quick check of the cluster status locally. With Clinic diagnostic service, you can ensure the stable operation of your TiDB cluster for its full life-cycle, predict potential issues, reduce the probability of the issues, troubleshoot quickly, and fix issues.
```

> Clinic is a diagnostic service provided by PingCAP for TiDB clusters. To the clusters deployed using TiUP and TiDB Operator, this service helps to troubleshoot remotely and perform a quick check of the cluster status locally. With Clinic diagnostic service, you can ensure the stable operation of your TiDB cluster for its full life-cycle, predict potential issues, reduce the probability of the issues, troubleshoot quickly, and fix issues.

Author: ```suggestion
Clinic is a diagnostic service provided by PingCAP for TiDB clusters. To the clusters deployed using TiUP and TiDB Operator, this service helps to troubleshoot cluster problems remotely and perform a quick check of the cluster status locally. With Clinic diagnostic service, you can ensure the stable operation of your TiDB cluster for its full life-cycle, predict potential issues, reduce the probability of the issues, troubleshoot problems quickly, and fix the problems.
```

> The Clinic diagnostic service is currently in the Beta testing stage, so only the invited users can use the service. The service provides the following two components to diagnose clusters:

Author: ```suggestion
TiDB Clinic is currently in the Beta testing stage, so only the invited users can use the service. The service provides the following two components to diagnose clusters:
```

> - Diag: The tool deployed on the cluster side. Diag is used to collect cluster diagnostic data, upload the diagnostic data to Clinic Server, and perform a quick health check locally on the cluster. For the list of diagnostic data collected by Diag, see [Clinic Diagnostic Data](/clinic/clinic-data-instruction-for-tiup.md).

Author: ```suggestion
- Diag: The tool deployed on the cluster side. Diag is used to collect cluster diagnostic data, upload the diagnostic data to the Clinic Server, and perform a quick health check locally on the cluster. For the list of diagnostic data collected by Diag, see [Clinic Diagnostic Data](/clinic/clinic-data-instruction-for-tiup.md).
```

    > **Note:**
    >

>     > - Diag temporarily **does not support** collecting data from the clusters with the TLS encryption enabled and the clusters deployed using TiDB Ansible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > - Diag temporarily **does not support** collecting data from the clusters deployed using TiDB Ansible.
```

>     > - If you need to upload data to the Clinic Server using Diag from the TiDB Clinic Beta version, contact [PingCAP technical support](https://en.pingcap.com/contact-us/) to get a trial account first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > - For the TiDB Clinic Beta version, if you want to upload data to the Clinic Server for remote troubleshooting using Diag, you need to contact [PingCAP technical support](https://en.pingcap.com/contact-us/) to get a trial account first.
```

>     > - The Clinic diagnostic service is currently in the Beta testing stage, so only the invited users can use the service. If you need to upload data to Clinic Server using Diag, you should get a trial account from the PingCAP technical support you contacted before.

Author: ```suggestion
    > - The Clinic diagnostic service is currently in the Beta testing stage, so only the invited users can use the service. If you need to upload data to Clinic Server using Diag, you should get a trial account from the PingCAP technical support staff you contacted before.
```

> - Clinic Server: The cloud service deployed in the cloud. By providing diagnostic services in SaaS mode, Clinic Server can not only receive the diagnostic data uploaded to the Clinic Server, but also store the data, view and diagnose the uploaded data online, and provide cluster diagnostic reports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clinic Server: The cloud service deployed in the cloud. By providing diagnostic services in SaaS mode, Clinic Server can not only receive the diagnostic data uploaded to the Clinic Server, but also store the data. It can provide online diagnostic environment for the uploaded data , and cluster diagnostic reports.
```

Reviewer: server 自己不能 view and diagnose the uploaded data online ，是给技术人员提供  online diagnostic environment

    > **Note:**
    >

>     > For the TiDB Clinic Beta version, external users cannot use the features of the Clinic Server. After you upload collected data to the Clinic Server and get a data link using Diag, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > For the TiDB Clinic Beta version, the features of the Clinic Server are not open for external users. After you upload collected data to the Clinic Server and get a data link using Diag, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.
```

>     > > For the TiDB Clinic Beta version, the features of the Clinic Server are **not** open for external users. After you upload collected data to the Clinic Server and get a data link using Diag, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.

Author: ```suggestion
    > For the TiDB Clinic Beta version, the features of the Clinic Server are **not** open for external users. After you upload collected data to the Clinic Server and get a data link using Diag, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.
```

>     > In the Beta version of the Clinic diagnostic service, external users cannot use the features of the Clinic server. After you upload the collected data to the Clinic Server and get the data link, only authorized PingCAP technical supports can access the link and view the data.

Author: ```suggestion
    > In the Beta version of the Clinic diagnostic service, external users cannot use the features of the Clinic server. After you upload the collected data to the Clinic Server and get the data link, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.
```

## User scenarios

> - Troubleshoot cluster problems remotely:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Troubleshoot cluster problems remotely
```

> - Troubleshoot a cluster remotely:

Author: ```suggestion
- Troubleshoot cluster problems remotely:
```

>     > In the Beta version of the Clinic diagnostic service, external users cannot use the features of the Clinic server. After you upload the collected data to the Clinic Server and get the data link, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.

Author: ```suggestion
    > In the Beta version of the Clinic diagnostic service, external users cannot use the features of the Clinic Server. After you upload the collected data to the Clinic Server and get the data link, only authorized PingCAP technical support staff can access the link and view the data.
```

    When you cluster has some issues that cannot be fixed quickly, you can ask for help at TiDB Community or contact PingCAP technical support. When applying technical support for remote assistance, you need to save various diagnostic data from the cluster and forward the data to them. In this case, you can use Diag to collect diagnostic data with one click. Diag helps you to collect complete diagnostic data quickly, which can replace complex manual data collection operations. After collecting data, you need to upload the data to the Clinic Server for PingCAP technical support. The Clinic Server provides secure storage for diagnostic data and supports online diagnosis, improving the efficiency of troubleshooting.

> - Quick check for cluster status locally:

Author: ```suggestion
- Perform a quick check for the cluster status locally:
```

>     When your cluster has some problems that cannot be fixed quickly, you can ask for help at [TiDB Community slack channel](https://tidbcommunity.slack.com/archives/CH7TTLL7P) or contact PingCAP technical support. When contacting technical support for remote assistance, you need to save various diagnostic data from the cluster and forward the data to the support staff. In this case, you can use Diag to collect diagnostic data with one click. Diag helps you to collect complete diagnostic data quickly, which can avoids complex manual data collection operations. After collecting data, you can upload the data to the Clinic Server for PingCAP technical support staff to troubleshoot cluster problems. The Clinic Server provides secure storage for uploaded diagnostic data and supports the online diagnosis, improving the efficiency of troubleshooting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When your cluster has some problems that cannot be fixed quickly, you can ask for help at [TiDB Community slack channel](https://tidbcommunity.slack.com/archives/CH7TTLL7P) or contact PingCAP technical support. When contacting technical support for remote assistance, you need to save various diagnostic data from the cluster and forward the data to the support staff. In this case, you can use Diag to collect diagnostic data with one click. Diag helps you to collect complete diagnostic data quickly, which can avoid complex manual data collection operations. After collecting data, you can upload the data to the Clinic Server for PingCAP technical support staff to troubleshoot cluster problems. The Clinic Server provides secure storage for uploaded diagnostic data and supports the online diagnosis, which greatly improves the troubleshooting efficiency.
```

>     When your cluster has some issues that cannot be fixed quickly, you can ask for help at TiDB Community or contact PingCAP technical support. When applying technical support for remote assistance, you need to save various diagnostic data from the cluster and forward the data to them. In this case, you can use Diag to collect diagnostic data with one click. Diag helps you to collect complete diagnostic data quickly, which can replace complex manual data collection operations. After collecting data, you need to upload the data to the Clinic Server for PingCAP technical support staff. The Clinic Server provides secure storage for diagnostic data and supports the online diagnosis, improving the efficiency of troubleshooting.

Author: @qiancai @qqqdan if they can use the slack channel, are they recommended to use the slack to ask questions,or contact technical support directly?

> - Perform a quick check on the cluster status locally:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Perform a quick check on the cluster status locally
```

>     Even if your cluster can run normally, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster for potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of the cluster using the local quick check feature provided by the Clinic diagnostic service. Clinic Beta version mainly provides a rationality check for cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.

Author: ```suggestion
    Even if your cluster can run normally, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster for potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of the cluster using the local quick check feature provided by the Clinic diagnostic service. Clinic in Beta version mainly provides a rationality check for cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.
```

>     Even if your cluster can run normally, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster for potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of the cluster using the local quick check feature provided by the Clinic diagnostic service. Clinic in Beta version mainly provides a rationality check for cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Even if your cluster is running stable, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster for potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of the cluster using the local quick check feature provided by the Clinic diagnostic service. Clinic in Beta version mainly provides a rationality check for cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.
```

>     Even if your cluster runs stably now, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster for potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of a cluster using the local quick check feature provided by TiDB Clinic. TiDB Clinic Beta version provides a rationality check on cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.

Author: ```suggestion
    Even if your cluster runs stably now, it is necessary to periodically check the cluster to avoid potential stability risks. You can check the potential health risks of a cluster using the local quick check feature provided by TiDB Clinic. The TiDB Clinic Beta version provides a rationality check on cluster configuration items to discover unreasonable configurations and provide modification suggestions.
```

## Implementation Principles

This section mainly introduces the implementation principles of Diag, a cluster-side tool provided by the Clinic service, to collect diagnostic data of a cluster.

First, Diag needs to get cluster topology information from the deployment tool TiUP (tiup-cluster) or TiDB Operator (tidb-operator). Then, Diag collects different types of diagnostic data through various data collection methods as follows:

- Transfer server files through SCP

    For clusters deployed using TiUP, Diag can collect log files and configuration files directly from the nodes of the target component through SCP (Secure copy protocol).

- Collect data by running commands remotely through SSH

>     For clusters deployed using TiUP, Diag can connect to the target component system through SSH (Secure Shell), and run commands (such as Insight) to obtain system information, including kernel logs, kernel parameters, and basic information of the system and the hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For clusters deployed using TiUP, Diag can connect to the target nodes through SSH (Secure Shell), and run commands (such as Insight) to obtain system information, including kernel logs, kernel parameters, and basic information of the system and the hardware.
```

>     For the clusters deployed using TiUP, Diag can connect to the target component system through SSH (Secure Shell) and run commands (such as Insight) to obtain system information, including kernel logs, kernel parameters, and basic system and the hardware information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For the clusters deployed using TiUP, Diag can connect to the target component system through SSH (Secure Shell) and run commands (such as Insight) to obtain system information, including kernel logs, kernel parameters, and basic information about the system and hardware.
```

- Collect data through HTTP call

    - By calling the HTTP interface of TiDB components, Diag can get the real-time configuration sampling information and the real-time performance sampling information of TiDB, TiKV, PD, and other components.

>     - By calling the HTTP interface of Prometheus, Diag can get alert information and metrics monitoring data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - By calling the HTTP interface of Prometheus, Diag can get alert information and monitoring metrics data.
```

- Query database parameters through SQL statements

>     Using SQL statements, Diag can query the system variables and other information of TiDB database. To use this method, you need to **additionally provide** the username and password to access TiDB database when collecting data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Using SQL statements, Diag can query system variables and other information of TiDB. To use this method, you need to **additionally provide** the username and password to access TiDB when collecting data.
```

>     Using SQL statements, Diag can query the system parameters and other information of the TiDB database. To use this method, you need to **additionally provide** the username and password to access the TiDB database when collecting data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Using SQL statements, Diag can query the system variables and other information of the TiDB database. To use this method, you need to **additionally provide** the username and password to access the TiDB database when collecting data.
```

## See also

 - [Use Clinic](/clinic/clinic-data-instruction-for-tiup.md)

>  - [Clinic Diagnostic Data](/clinic/clinic-data-instruction-for-tiup.md)

Author: how about change as follows?

[Clinic Diagnostic Data](/clinic/clinic-data-instruction-for-tiup.md): learn what diagnostic data can be collected
